Akash | ECH: Hey! Hello!
Pooja Ranjan: Hello, Akash, so we don't need to change any setting, and it should work for both platforms simultaneously, right.
Akash | ECH: Yeah, yeah.
Pooja Ranjan: Okay, cool so I just have selected fossil breakout 15. And let's see if it works there.
Pooja Ranjan: I'm going to start the stream for starting soon transition.
Pooja Ranjan: and let me know if it comes out right.
Akash | ECH: Yeah, we are live on both the platforms.
Pooja Ranjan: Awesome. Thank you.
Akash | ECH: We can.
Jihoon: Hello!
Jihoon: I think we can wait like one more minute and then start the call
Jihoon: alright. I think we can start the call. Thanks for joining us. Hello, everyone! Welcome to the 15th possible breakout.
Jihoon: Toma is here, but he cannot stay longer, so I will be running this breakout.
Jihoon: So I want to share
Jihoon: few updates. Yeah, thank you, Toma, I want to share a few things related to call Amsterdam. And then
Jihoon: we can move to implementation updates. And then, if anything else
Jihoon: that I haven't added to the agenda, we can also talk about them.
Jihoon: Firstly, as many of us here might already know. You can express your preferences of the headliner for Glimpster Diamond Forecast.
Jihoon: Here's a link, and at the Acd call
Jihoon: we briefly talked about the headliner for Clemsterdam. And we realized we want to have more opinions from client teams and the community.
Jihoon: So please make a vote and let it be heard via Discord Twitter, or, as it calls.
Jihoon: here's another link you might want to share your preferences.
Jihoon: I also want to re-emphasize why, we need fossil, even though the censorship today has gotten better.
Jihoon: We are seeing less censorship because up builders are not censoring for whatever reason.
Jihoon: but ethereum is vulnerable to censorship threat if top builders were to turn on their censorship again.
Jihoon: Not censoring and hand censoring are fundamentally different.
Jihoon: Ethereum censorship. Resistance can be swayed by the opinions of a few
Jihoon: fossil is not a Bonancia, but it does improve censorship resistance by far.
Jihoon: so Glimpster. Time is probably a good fork to ship censorship resistance, and we can still ship other proposals that that scale l. 1 l. 2, and improve. Ux.
Jihoon: Lastly, let me share an update regarding the epbs and fossil compatibility.
Jihoon: We have a new article written by Toma
Jihoon: with the Pbs. Bag is being updated by potos. The compatibility between the Pbs and fossil is also revisited. The article provides the up-to-date ideas about the compatibility it uses the Irbit list.
Jihoon: It's a bit list indicates the Ils that a builder considered when building a block.
Jihoon: If I were to provide a clunky summary of it. Please feel free to jump in. Don't mind if I'm making some wrong explanation.
Jihoon: Testers validate. If a payload for previous slot satisfy the il constraints, and check if the il bit list of a beacon block for current slot is a superset of their subjective il view.
Jihoon: In this way we can leverage the whole Beacon Committee for the Irp List inclusivity check, but on alternatively
Jihoon: we can decide to let Pdc. Perform it. This allows us to reorg a payload instead of a peacom block
Jihoon: when it fails, the inclusivity check
Jihoon: while this give us better liveness. Are we going to rely on Ptc. Instead of the whole taken committee for the inclusivity. Check.
Jihoon: So it boils down to the trade off for more details. Please take a look into the article.
Jihoon: Next up is implementation updates
Jihoon: before we jump into it. Does anyone have any questions or comments?
Jihoon: I guess we're good. So let me just continue. I guess the implementation updates will be mostly about back.
Jihoon: But please feel free to jump in and share if you have any other updates. So in the previous breakout call, we discussed about how to specify the
Jihoon: see. A spec. Afterward I shared a write-up. That explains what were the problems. And what are the possible solutions.
Jihoon: thanks to detailed feedback from Mikhail just in a medi, or we were able to find a much better way to write us back. So now the Pr has updated. And now I'm working on the El Spec. In the meantime, I guess people will be busy with other stuff like Fusaka. But can we have more eyes on the Pr. And Margit? If it's okay, let me share the link to the Pr in the chat.
Jihoon: Yeah. So merging it into the into into this main branch would allow me to reason my work on the sales spectas. So yes, Justin.
Justin Traglia: Yeah, I would love to get this merged in soon, too.
Jihoon: Thank you.
Justin Traglia: I'll give it a proper review today, and then maybe wait for my file to give his review. And then merge.
Justin Traglia: Or is that great? Thanks.
Jihoon: Yeah, okay, cool.
Jihoon: Yep. So that's all from my end. Does anyone have any other updates, thoughts, comments, or feedback?
Jihoon: I guess today's breakout is quite
Jihoon: nice and neat. Maybe tomorrow you wanna say something.
Jihoon: Otherwise we can, just, you know, call it a day, and then see each other after 2 weeks.
Jihoon: Oh, right so in a chat, Thomas says.
Jihoon: Curious to hear if people have opinions on fossil
Jihoon: and call Amsterdam so in a twitter. We are seeing
Jihoon: people are expressing their preferences on what should be the headliner for Amsterdam, and they are, you know.
Jihoon: putting eips in different ranks from S to D. Some people put fossil on S. Some people put it on d
Jihoon: can we have some, you know.
Jihoon: as people hear about what their preference is
Jihoon: right, so
Jihoon: right, and it would be valuable if you could let us know if you don't think that fossil should be shipped in Glamsterdam. Then I'd be curious curious to learn why.
Jihoon: Because, yeah, it is it because of the proposal itself, or is because, you know, like it touches so many things from cl to el? Or is it because of
Jihoon: a priority priority, as in the 3 goals of the Ef scale l. 1 l. 2, and improve ux or whatnot.
Justin Traglia: Oh, I have a dumb question. Forecast isn't like an official voting mechanism that doesn't track anything. You're just like. It would share the screenshot on Twitter or something.
Justin Traglia: Or is there a better way?
Justin Traglia: Okay, it's not.
Justin Traglia: It would be nice if there were some
Justin Traglia: more formal voting mechanism where it was like public.
Justin Traglia: Okay. Another time.
thomasthiery: Okay, I I mean, it's probably where I can talk a bit. But yeah, I think
thomasthiery: I think there are pros. And and against official voting mechanisms, and that will necessarily like
thomasthiery: need to buy in from most of the people, and like a whole sort of like rethinking around governance. I think the Str list is more. Yeah, informal way of stating preferences. That is a bit more fun and nice. But yeah, shouldn't be considered like a
thomasthiery: like an actual thing. I think it's still nice to share. And just because even for me.
thomasthiery: you know, I've been less involved in other proposals, and just like
thomasthiery: trying to look at Stl's. It actually forced me to to look more into the
thomasthiery: some of the other ones I like didn't know much about which was nice.
thomasthiery: But but yeah shouldn't be taken very, very seriously.
Jihoon: Fair point. Acd calls are the official channel. If I'm not wrong.
thomasthiery: Yeah, exactly.
Jihoon: Yes.
thomasthiery: And yeah, maybe to reformulate or to the question. I just wonder if, like anyone here has
thomasthiery: concerns about the mechanism, or if it's just a matter of priority and urgency into including stuff
thomasthiery: rather than for soon. Because if if it's
thomasthiery: if it's the former, I would love to know. So we can maybe try to work on it. If it's the latter, then there's probably not enough work to do on the proposal or mechanism itself. It's it's just like a matter of preference and and urgency.
thomasthiery: Okay, so I I will take it as not.
thomasthiery: Okay.
thomasthiery: Yeah. If anyone has ideas about like things they think are wrong with the proposal, like, let me know there was some a bit of turbulence on Twitter today, because
thomasthiery: the Max Resnick, who is now at Enza and Solana.
thomasthiery: He is a bit known to be like vocal on Twitter, but he was saying that it adds latency to the critical path.
thomasthiery: Because of the view merge mechanism, I think like that's
thomasthiery: I mean, the Id is partially right. And but the the time it's like the actual latency itself, like can be reduced down to less. For sure.
thomasthiery: if we, we think it's like
thomasthiery: completely safe to reduce that latency between, like, basically the view freeze for the attesters and and and the proposal.
thomasthiery: but yeah, I think my thinking is like, let's start with like good safety mail margins, and then look at how it behaves on on testnet and mainnet, and maybe then reduce it down. I really don't think it's like it's like a
thomasthiery: truthful point that we
thomasthiery: should take like at heart. But it's it's still interesting to to hear it and and think about
thomasthiery: how and whether and when we can reduce that that latency.
Jihoon: But is it correct to make an argument in that way? Because
Jihoon: inclusion leads is not the only way. I mean not the only channel to include transactions.
thomasthiery: Yeah, for sure. No, no, I I think it's it's not. I think it's 1 additional channel. So yeah, it doesn't.
thomasthiery: You know, it doesn't reduce anything for transactions that don't go through that mechanism.
thomasthiery: so yeah, that's a that's a good point.
thomasthiery: and yeah, I think it's really nice to also like look at the fossil and and shorter slot times. I'm also I also agree with Justin. I think it's safer to reduce slot times after fossil is included. Just because, like reducing, you know, slot time
thomasthiery: can sort of sort of like shorten some deadlines. That we currently have in the protocol. So like, we sort of like reduce safety margins in a way. And
thomasthiery: yeah, I mean my my take. And I know it's not shared by everyone. But like I feel like it's it's nice to have, like a good slot structure we like before we shorten slot times rather than doing it the other way around but that's just my preference.
thomasthiery: I I think I'm like open to do it myself. But like if everyone else like wants to do it. They're welcome to, but like sort of do you know, fossil
thomasthiery: and shorten shorter slot times compatibility post, just like I did with the Eps epbs and fossil might be useful. But the yeah, the overall point is like.
thomasthiery: no, it's not incompatible. And yeah,
thomasthiery: I mean, at 1 point. It, you know, especially if we go to 6, basically like going to 6 is not incompatible with fossil. Like, if we go to yeah, 2 or 3. Then, of course, like, there is this sort of like view merge mechanism that like adds
thomasthiery: some latency that can't be compressed down to 0. But yeah.
thomasthiery: yeah. So when we talk about shorter slot times, are we talking about 6 seconds.
Stefano De Angelis: Yeah, maybe even less than 6 seconds.
thomasthiery: Okay.
Stefano De Angelis: Long run.
thomasthiery: Right right? I mean, if you go down and down and down then yes, there will be some some like tension between fossil and like.
thomasthiery: you know, one second slot time, I think, for sure. But then we need to re-architecture like the whole consensus mechanism anyways, like the whole.
thomasthiery: That needs to be so much more of a restructuring than what we are thinking about right now, that it's even hard to exactly grasp how that will play out and fossil will be one of the things we have to rethink if we want to go to like one second time. But for 6 I don't. I actually don't. Don't think there is any incompatibility. There.
Stefano De Angelis: And so can we say that even if we go to 6, which is the most plausible approach, then we we can
Stefano De Angelis: still have fossil working on Mainnet, and we don't have to restructure anything. In that case.
thomasthiery: Yeah, yeah, I think I can write the argument more like nicely. But yeah, I really don't think there is any tension with like 6 seconds of the time. And for so
thomasthiery: because I mean, il building and broadcasting is literally done in parallel at the same time as like block building.
thomasthiery: So it it, yeah, it doesn't really conflict with anything else.
Stefano De Angelis: Thanks.
thomasthiery: But yeah, I do have a feeling that this question will be asked
thomasthiery: a lot, and maybe we want to
thomasthiery: write something about it. So it's it's more clear. And we we can also, like, get our feedback and and opinions from from you guys.
Stefano De Angelis: Yeah, maybe it would be good to have some quantitative experiments.
thomasthiery: Yeah, yeah, for sure.
thomasthiery: You mean, with, like
thomasthiery: the time it takes for stations to propagate, I mean, and like things like this, or like
Stefano De Angelis: Yeah, yeah, that's it.
thomasthiery: Okay, yeah, I mean for sure. And that's it's nice. Because this effort is anyways sort of like done because it needs to be done for shorter slot times in any case. So we can just take advantage of this and and see how well it it fits with with fossil. But I yeah again, I don't think it will conflict.
Stefano De Angelis: Yeah, I think the the most important parameters for such an experimentation would be slot times
Stefano De Angelis: and number of inclusion lists. And see where is the
Stefano De Angelis: the maximum? Right? So where the the setting, the the optimal setting saturates after we reach that optimal.
thomasthiery: Right? Yeah. So one thing that's important to still keep in mind, I guess, is like that.
thomasthiery: Inclusion lists with by by definition always be much smaller than the block size.
thomasthiery: So yeah, I I doubt they will ever be the bottleneck. Because.
thomasthiery: yeah, the the there is also like a current thinking that we won't necessarily want or need to include, like increase the inclusionally size as we increase the gas limit for blocks that's not like that doesn't actually have to go together. So you can like. And and the the goal is like, you know, if we actually get to decouple local block building from
thomasthiery: solo stakes. Then we could actually like sort of increase the delta between inclusion lists and the the throughput of the chain.
thomasthiery: So like the gas limit for blocks. Basically,
thomasthiery: yeah, and so yeah, just saying, like.
thomasthiery: basically, I don't think we should necessarily scale the scale. The is as we scale the the block like the gas, and that then it will become even less of a bottleneck compared to like broadcasting full blocks.
thomasthiery: Yeah, number of just sorry, Katya. Just number of includes matters and the size of the inclusion list matters a lot as well.
thomasthiery: Now it's it's meant to basically have all inclusion lists. So the 16 be the size of the size of one blob
thomasthiery: that was like sort of like the thinking around the size. But both do matter, and
thomasthiery: both can be changed.
thomasthiery: even though we don't think like it's going to be a strain on the network right now.
thomasthiery: Yeah, catch up.
Katya Riazantseva: Yeah, hello. So I'm currently working on the metrics we discussed in Berlin. Interrupt and probably will publish a draft
Katya Riazantseva: today or tomorrow. So we will see the picture like the size of Els, the number of Els, and
Katya Riazantseva: potentially it could help like to evaluate the 6 slot.
Katya Riazantseva: Yeah. 6 second slot I hope it will help, so we will soon see it on both Star and maybe other teams will join.
thomasthiery: Yeah, that's that's awesome. That's like exactly what we need to start gathering metrics and start like making choices accordingly.
thomasthiery: so it's.
Katya Riazantseva: So so my plan is to add, the dashboard to quote for cortosis, so every client which has the same metrics will be able to use the dashboard. So yeah, maybe by by the next call, I hope. Yeah, we'll have some results.
thomasthiery: Nice.
thomasthiery: Thank you.
thomasthiery: Yeah, that would be really, really awesome. Thanks.
thomasthiery: Okay, does anyone have anything else to say? Sorry to? I actually have to to run. But it was, it was fun to discuss this.
thomasthiery: and just before we maybe close
thomasthiery: off Botus is asking in the inclusion list chat if we went over
thomasthiery: the doc about the epbs and fossil compatibility. So Jihoon gave a good overview. But
thomasthiery: maybe next time I can actually go and present it a bit more if people are interested.
thomasthiery: because I feel like maybe it's nicer if, like, I send it in advance and say, there will be a presentation. So everyone has time to just like, read it and and know about the the
thomasthiery: does that sound like an okay idea?
Jihoon: Yes, sounds awesome. So yeah. So we, you know, did this kind of
Jihoon: research updates in our prior calls.
Jihoon: And maybe it's good time to revisit the compatibility between the Pbs and possible.
Jihoon: I have a question. Is that article fully reviewed?
Jihoon: I have a question about some sentences, so I wonder if it's like fully reviewed by people who's working on
Jihoon: both a Pbs and fossil.
thomasthiery: So Terrence and Botus both had a look.
thomasthiery: I mean, it doesn't mean like they, you know, looked extremely into the details of everything, and for me, same like there could be still mistake in there.
thomasthiery: If you want to give feedback like, you can either just like post on on, if magicians, or reach out to me or or start discussions in this call like any.
thomasthiery: anyway, is fine. And if yeah, if you spotted some like things that were like inaccurate, or maybe that needed some more like some better wording just for sure. Let us know.
Jihoon: Gotcha, I wanna you know
Jihoon: dig deep into a eps and fossil. So let me reach out to you sometime
Jihoon: in this week or next week. Thank you.
thomasthiery: Yeah, that sounds great awesome.
thomasthiery: Cool.
thomasthiery: Alright, if that was all for everyone, maybe we can keep this one short.
thomasthiery: What do you think.
Jihoon: Yeah, we can just see each other 2 weeks later, and thanks everyone joining. And thanks Toma for staying with a call. So yeah, thank you. Everyone.
thomasthiery: Thanks everyone, bye.
Katya Riazantseva: You bye, everyone.